
			       Release 1.18.1

Fix bug where graph clearing didn't actually work.

			       Release 1.18

Various mechanisms to allow us to work on top of different versions of a
given server.  (Motivated by the fact that they changed the default set of
indexes starting in Virtuoso 6.1.0.)

Flexible load specifications.  If you make use of this feature by using
structures in `load' in a bundle Config.pl file, you must also set the
`class_version' to at least 4.

Bug fixes.

			       Release 1.17

Multiple graphs per bundle.  If you make use of this feature by using
`load_graphs' in a bundle Config.pl file, you must also set the
`class_version' to at least 3.

Improved Loaded.log file versioning.  Support for prehistoric Loaded.log
format removed.

Bug fixes.

			       Release 1.16

Allow entries in Bundle `load' parameter to be a directory meaning to load
all files under that directory.

Virtuoso 5.0.8 is now -required-.

Bug fixes.

			       Release 1.14

Internal bugfix release: make it possible to access the State database and
not signal an error if it is locked by somebody else.

			       Release 1.13

Added config_path, config_string and config_ref subcommands to rdfherd.
Made --noquestions actually work.

			       Release 1.12

Added a new Config.pl setting for Virtuoso servers: result_set_max_rows.
This controls the value of ResultSetMaxRows in the virtuoso.ini file, and
sets it to 2 billion to work around a bug in Virtuoso 5.0.9 and 5.0.10.

I fixed a bug in config/init_script.sh where it would fail to work unless
the virtuoso user has his shell set to an actual Bourne-type shell.  If you
copied the previous version, you might want to update your copy.

If you are updating from an older version of RDFHerd, you should run

  rdfherd /virtuoso/working/directory configure

in order to update your Virtuoso configuration.

			       Release 1.11

The bundle_update sub-command now accepts a `--all' option.  If `--all' is
specified, all of the bundles that the specified bundles depend upon are
updated as well.

Generally tidy things up before the first public release.

			       Release 1.09

bundle_update now offers to do a continue_update if it thinks that's what
you probably want.

Subbundles are now updated in a deterministic order: alphabetically (by
default) or in the order written if you use an array ([...]) rather than a
hash ({...}) in the Config.pl file.

When debugging script files, the output now includes timestamps.

Script files always run with log_enable(2).

When trying to connect to the server, the rdfherd command now waits for the
server to start responding.

Bug fixes.

			       Release 1.08

Now a bundle Config.pl file can say:

    no_need_to_clear_version => 5,

to indicate that updating from any version -before- version 5 of this
bundle requires that the bundle's graph be cleared first.

(no_need_to_clear_version defaults to 0, so by default you never clear.)

Each server instance now gets its own ServerRoot in its http_server/
directory.

(In order to properly activate this feature you have to give both the
`configure' subcommand and the `prepare_for_initial_load' subcommand.
Unfortunately the `prepare_for_initial_load' command won't let you run it a
second time!  So you can really only get this working if you build a
database completely from scratch.  Hopefully the only people who will be
inconvenienced will be my officemates, and I think they can take it...)

The `frontend' bundle can now be loaded by people who want the
"NeuroCommons query" front page.

The .nt file type is recognized.

			       Release 1.07

Added an LSB boot script for inclusion in /etc/init.d/.
New commands: database_clear, database_save, database_restore.

			       Release 1.06

Internal release: mostly bug fixes.

Change "read_and_accepted" to "notices_read" in Config files.

			       Release 1.05

Internal release: New .script file format with kludgey interpreter.

			       Release 1.04

Internal release: mostly bug fixes.

The prepare_for_initial_load subcommand now rebuilds the RDF_QUAD table in
the order: (S, P, O, G).

Includes support for defining and exporting named SQL statements.  (With no
support for -running- them included!)

			       Release 1.03

This release was put together mostly so we could share it with the folks at
OpenLink Software.

If you are one of the three people who downloaded version 1.01, you will
essentially have to start over.  (That won't be as bad as you might think
given that loading the database is now more than 20 times faster!)  

This release still doesn't perform the final steps of building a
Neurocommons Mirror.

			       Release 1.02

This was an internal release.

			       Release 1.01

This is the first version good enough to be considered "released".  It
doesn't, in fact, completely do the job, but it should get 99.9% of your
database loaded.

____________________________________________________________
$Id: Changes 3580 2010-08-18 22:51:54Z bawden $
